Add vector data analysis tutorial (#136)
OSGeo/grass-tutorials: content/tutorials/vector_analysis/vector_analysis.qmd

---

> title: "Vector Data Analysis with GRASS"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Basic Vector Data Analysis with GRASS"
```

categories: [vector, beginner, intermediate, Python]
description: >
  Learn the core vector operations in GRASS: exploring attributes, selecting by
  attribute and by location, buffering, overlay, and counting features per area.
format:
  ipynb: default
  html:
    toc: true
    code-tools: true
    code-copy: true
    code-fold: false
engine: jupyter
execute:
  eval: false
jupyter: python3
---

# Introduction

Vector data represents geographic features as **points**, **lines**, and **areas**,
each linked to a table of **attributes**. GRASS has a large family of `v.*` tools for
working with them. This tutorial introduces the operations you will reach for most
often, using a single worked example: analyzing how schools in Wake County, North
Carolina relate to major roads and administrative areas.

Along the way we will:

- explore a vector map and its attribute table,
- **select by attribute** with [v.extract](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.extract.html),
- **buffer** features with [v.buffer](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.buffer.html),
- **select by location** with [v.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.select.html),

> - combine layers with [v.overlay](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.overlay.html), and

Reviewer: v.overlay combines when we do the union; I would say "perform spatial operations with v.overlay", instead

- count features per area with [v.vect.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.vect.stats.html).

> ![Number of schools per ZIP code area in Wake County, from few (light) to many (dark).](images/thumbnail.webp)

Reviewer: I'd remove this image from here as it is generated below.

::: {.callout-note title="Demo dataset"}
This tutorial uses the standard GRASS
[North Carolina sample dataset](https://grass.osgeo.org/sampledata/north_carolina/nc_spm_08_grass7.zip)
(`nc_spm_08_grass7`), which includes `schools_wake` (points), `roadsmajor` (lines),
and `zipcodes_wake` (areas).
:::

::: {.callout-note title="How to run this tutorial"}
The code uses the GRASS Python API in a Jupyter notebook. If you are new to running
GRASS from Python, see the
[Get started](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/get_started/fast_track.html)

> tutorials. Every step also works from the GRASS GUI or command line — just use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Get started](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/get_started/fast_track_grass_and_python.html)
tutorial. Every step also works from the GRASS GUI or command line — just use the
```

tool name (for example `v.buffer`) with the same parameters.
:::

> ::: {.callout-note title="GRASS version"}

Reviewer: To avoid callout boxes cluttering (3 of them, one right after the other doesn't look nice), move this callout below the setup code block

Start a GRASS session and set the
[computational region](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/g.region.html) to
the extent of the ZIP code areas, which cover the whole county. For vector-only work
the region mainly controls what the maps display.

```{python}
import sys
import subprocess

sys.path.append(
    subprocess.check_output(["grass", "--config", "python_path"], text=True).strip()
)

import grass.script as gs
import grass.jupyter as gj
from grass.tools import Tools

session = gj.init("~/grassdata", "nc_spm_08_grass7", "PERMANENT")
tools = Tools()

tools.g_region(vector="zipcodes_wake")
```

Before analyzing a layer, it helps to know what it contains.
[v.info](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.info.html) reports the feature
types and counts, and its `-c` flag lists the attribute columns.

```{python}
# Feature summary (points, lines, areas ...)
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="t").stdout)

# Attribute columns
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="c").stdout)
```

`schools_wake` has 167 point features. To peek at a few attribute values, use
[v.db.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.db.select.html):

> ```{python}

Reviewer: I would first show the actual attribute table, so people at least understand where this GLEVEL=H comes from... So, first v.db.select map=schools_wake and then the selection. Also, note that v.db.select can output a JSON file, which can be easily converted into a nice table.

print(tools.v_db_select(map="schools_wake", columns="NAMESHORT,GLEVEL",
                        where="GLEVEL='H'").stdout)
```

Let's start with an overview map: the ZIP code areas, the major roads, and every
school. In [grass.jupyter](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/libpython/grass.jupyter.html),
a `Map` object collects display layers and renders them together.

```{python}
overview = gj.Map(width=800)
overview.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",

>                 fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")

Reviewer: Please do not use a black background. Also, smaller images would look much better and the whole thing flows better when images are smaller. Try with width=400 or 500.

overview.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="90:90:90", width=1)
overview.d_vect(map="schools_wake", icon="basic/circle", size=7,
                fill_color="200:30:30", color="white")
overview.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
overview.show()
```

![Wake County: ZIP code areas (gray), major roads, and all 167 schools (red).](images/overview.webp)

# Selecting by attribute

The `GLEVEL` column records each school's grade level (`E` for elementary, `M` for
middle, `H` for high, and so on). To keep just the **95 elementary schools**, use
[v.extract](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.extract.html) with a SQL
`where` clause.

```{python}
tools.v_extract(input="schools_wake", output="elementary", where="GLEVEL='E'")
print(tools.v_info(map="elementary", flags="t").stdout)  # points=95
```

```{python}

> attr_map = gj.Map(width=800)

Reviewer: Same comment as above regarding images. Also, consider enhancing the scale bar or placing it differently, so it does not overlap the map features.

reminder that major roads here are highways, while most schools sit on local streets.

```{python}
near_map = gj.Map(width=800)
near_map.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
near_map.d_vect(map="road_buffer", type="area", fill_color="255:230:200", color="none")
near_map.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="150:110:60", width=1)
near_map.d_vect(map="elementary", icon="basic/circle", size=7,
                fill_color="150:150:150", color="none")
near_map.d_vect(map="schools_near", icon="basic/circle", size=9,
                fill_color="20:150:60", color="white")
near_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
near_map.show()
```

![Elementary schools within 500 m of a major road (green) versus the rest (gray).](images/near_roads.webp)

# Overlaying layers

[v.overlay](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.overlay.html) combines two
area maps with set operations. With `operator=and` we get the **intersection** — the
part of the road corridor that falls within each ZIP code area. The output keeps the
attributes of both inputs, so you could, for example, measure how much of each ZIP

> code is within reach of a major road.

Reviewer: Would be nice to actually show how to estimate how much area of each ZIP is within reach of a major road.

```{python}
tools.v_overlay(ainput="road_buffer", binput="zipcodes_wake",
                operator="and", output="buffer_by_zip")
```

```{python}
overlay_map = gj.Map(width=800)
overlay_map.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                   fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
overlay_map.d_vect(map="buffer_by_zip", type="area",
                   fill_color="120:180:220", color="80:80:80", width=1)
overlay_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
overlay_map.show()
```

![The road buffer intersected with the ZIP code areas; polygons are split at ZIP boundaries.](images/overlay.webp)

# Counting features per area

A common summary is "how many points fall in each area?"
[v.vect.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.vect.stats.html) counts
the points of one map within the areas of another and writes the result to the area

> map's attribute table. We first copy the ZIP codes with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
map's attribute table. We first create a copy of the ZIP codes map with
```

```

Each ZIP code now has an `n_schools` value (ranging from 0 to 17 here). We map it as a
choropleth with
[d.vect.thematic](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/d.vect.thematic.html),
using quantile classes so each color holds a similar number of areas.

```{python}
choropleth = gj.Map(width=800)
choropleth.d_vect_thematic(
    map="zip_counts", column="n_schools", algorithm="qua", nclasses=5,
    colors="255:245:215,255:200:120,240:140:60,200:70:30,140:20:20",
)
choropleth.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="120:120:120", width=1)
choropleth.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
choropleth.show()
```

![Schools per ZIP code area, classified into five quantiles from light (few) to dark (many).](images/choropleth.webp)

# Summary

Using the North Carolina schools, roads, and ZIP codes, you have worked through the
core vector toolkit in GRASS:

- exploring features and attributes with `v.info` and `v.db.select`,
- **selecting by attribute** (`v.extract`) and **by location** (`v.select`),
- **buffering** (`v.buffer`) and **overlaying** (`v.overlay`) layers, and
- **counting** points per area (`v.vect.stats`) for a thematic map.

> These operations combine into most vector workflows. To turn results like the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operations described here are common in most vector workflows. To turn results like the
```

choropleth into a finished, annotated map, continue with
[Making Thematic Maps](../thematic_maps/thematic_maps.qmd). To bring raster terrain
into the analysis, see

> [Visualizing and Modeling Terrain from DEMs in GRASS](../terrain_and_DEMs/GRASS_terrain.qmd).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
As there's no specific suggestion on how to connect this tutorial with the terrain one, I suggest to remove the sentence about raster terrain.

```

::: {.callout-note title="GRASS version"}
The examples use the [grass.tools API](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/python_intro.html)
(the `Tools` class), introduced in GRASS 8.5. On earlier versions you can run the
same tools with `gs.run_command("v.buffer", ...)`.
:::

Before analyzing a layer, it helps to know what it contains.
[v.info](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.info.html) reports the feature
types and counts, and its `-c` flag lists the attribute columns.

```{python}
# Feature summary (points, lines, areas ...)
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="t").stdout)

# Attribute columns
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="c").stdout)
```

`schools_wake` has 167 point features. Let's look at the attribute table itself.
[v.db.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.db.select.html) can
return the table as JSON, which [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) turns into a tidy
table:

```{python}
import json
import pandas as pd

records = json.loads(
    tools.v_db_select(
        map="schools_wake",
        columns="NAMESHORT,GLEVEL,ADDRCITY,CORECAPACI",
        format="json",
    ).stdout
)["records"]

> pd.DataFrame(records).head()

Reviewer: It would be nice to actually see a subset of the table

```

> The `GLEVEL` column records each school's grade level (`E` for elementary, `M` for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GLEVEL` column records each school's level (`E` for elementary, `M` for
```

middle, `H` for high, and so on) — we will use it in a moment to select schools by
attribute. Let's first draw an overview map: the ZIP code areas, the major roads, and

> every school. In [grass.jupyter](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/libpython/grass.jupyter.html),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the schools. In [grass.jupyter](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/libpython/grass.jupyter.html),
```

a `Map` object collects display layers and renders them together.

```{python}
overview = gj.Map(width=500)
overview.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
overview.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="90:90:90", width=1)
overview.d_vect(map="schools_wake", icon="basic/circle", size=7,
                fill_color="200:30:30", color="white")
overview.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")
overview.show()
```

![Wake County: ZIP code areas (gray), major roads, and all 167 schools (red).](images/overview.webp)

# Selecting by attribute

> To keep just the **95 elementary schools** (`GLEVEL='E'`), use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep just the **elementary schools** (`GLEVEL='E'`), use
```

[v.extract](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.extract.html) with a SQL
`where` clause.

```{python}
tools.v_extract(input="schools_wake", output="elementary", where="GLEVEL='E'")
print(tools.v_info(map="elementary", flags="t").stdout)  # points=95
```

```{python}
attr_map = gj.Map(width=500)
attr_map.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
attr_map.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="90:90:90", width=1)
attr_map.d_vect(map="schools_wake", icon="basic/circle", size=6,
                fill_color="180:180:180", color="none")
attr_map.d_vect(map="elementary", icon="basic/circle", size=8,
                fill_color="30:120:200", color="white")
attr_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")
attr_map.show()
```

![Elementary schools (blue) selected from all schools (gray) by attribute.](images/elementary.webp)

# Buffering

> A **buffer** is a zone of a given distance around features. Here we buffer the major

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **buffer** is an area of a given radius around features. Here we buffer the major
```

to represent an "along a major road" corridor. The result is an area map.

```{python}
tools.v_buffer(input="roadsmajor", output="road_buffer", distance=500)
```

```{python}
buffer_map = gj.Map(width=500)
buffer_map.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                  fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
buffer_map.d_vect(map="road_buffer", type="area", fill_color="255:200:120", color="none")
buffer_map.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="120:70:20", width=1)
buffer_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")
buffer_map.show()
```

![A 500 m buffer (orange) around the major roads.](images/buffer.webp)

# Selecting by location

Now we combine two layers spatially:
[v.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.select.html) keeps features
of one map based on their spatial relationship to another. With `operator=overlap`,
we keep the elementary schools that fall inside the road buffer.

```{python}
tools.v_select(ainput="elementary", binput="road_buffer",
               output="schools_near", operator="overlap")
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_near", flags="t").stdout)  # points=15
```

> Only **15 of the 95 elementary schools** lie within 500 m of a major road — a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only **15 out of the 95 elementary schools** lie within 500 m of a major road — a
```

                operator="and", output="buffer_by_zip")
```

```{python}
overlay_map = gj.Map(width=500)
overlay_map.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                   fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
overlay_map.d_vect(map="buffer_by_zip", type="area",
                   fill_color="120:180:220", color="80:80:80", width=1)
overlay_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")
overlay_map.show()
```

![The road buffer intersected with the ZIP code areas; polygons are split at ZIP boundaries.](images/overlay.webp)

Because each piece now carries its ZIP code, we can measure how much of each ZIP code
is within reach of a major road.
[v.to.db](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.to.db.html) computes the area
of every polygon, and a grouped SQL query with
[db.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/db.select.html) sums it per
ZIP code:

```{python}
tools.v_to_db(map="buffer_by_zip", option="area", columns="reach_area", units="kilometers")

print(tools.db_select(
    sql="SELECT b_ZIPNAME, ROUND(SUM(reach_area), 1) AS reach_km2 "
        "FROM buffer_by_zip GROUP BY b_ZIPNAME ORDER BY reach_km2 DESC"
).stdout)
```

> 

Reviewer: Also here, it would be nice to see an extract of the table. Note  that db.select also has a json output, so the same trick as above can be applied

the points of one map within the areas of another and writes the result to the area
map's attribute table. We first create a copy of the ZIP codes map with
[g.copy](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/g.copy.html) so the original is
untouched.

```{python}
tools.g_copy(vector=("zipcodes_wake", "zip_counts"))
tools.v_vect_stats(points="schools_wake", areas="zip_counts", count_column="n_schools")
```

Each ZIP code now has an `n_schools` value (ranging from 0 to 17 here). We map it as a
choropleth with
[d.vect.thematic](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/d.vect.thematic.html),
using quantile classes so each color holds a similar number of areas.

```{python}
choropleth = gj.Map(width=500)
choropleth.d_vect_thematic(
    map="zip_counts", column="n_schools", algorithm="qua", nclasses=5,
    colors="255:245:215,255:200:120,240:140:60,200:70:30,140:20:20",
)
choropleth.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="120:120:120", width=1)
choropleth.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")
choropleth.show()
```

![Schools per ZIP code area, classified into five quantiles from light (few) to dark (many).](images/choropleth.webp)

# Summary

> Using the North Carolina schools, roads, and ZIP codes, you have worked through the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the North Carolina schools, roads, and ZIP codes, we have worked through the
```

table:

```{python}
import pandas as pd

pd.DataFrame(
    tools.v_db_select(
        map="schools_wake",
        columns="NAMESHORT,GLEVEL,ADDRCITY,CORECAPACI",
        format="json",
    )["records"]
).head()
```

| NAMESHORT | GLEVEL | ADDRCITY | CORECAPACI |
|---|---|---|---|
| SWIFT CREEK | E | Raleigh | 448.0 |
| BRIARCLIFF | E | Cary | 540.0 |
| FARMINGTON WOODS | E | Cary | 523.0 |
| CARY | H | Cary | 2287.0 |
| ADAMS | E | Cary | 722.0 |

The `GLEVEL` column records each school's level (`E` for elementary, `M` for
middle, `H` for high, and so on), which we use next to select schools by
attribute. Let's first draw an overview map: the ZIP code areas, the major roads, and
the schools. In [grass.jupyter](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/libpython/grass.jupyter.html),
a `Map` object collects display layers and renders them together.

```{python}
overview = gj.Map(width=500)
overview.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
overview.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="90:90:90", width=1)
overview.d_vect(map="schools_wake", icon="basic/circle", size=7,
                fill_color="200:30:30", color="white")

> overview.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(60, 4), bgcolor="white")

Reviewer 2: Looks bad
```suggestion
overview.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(60, 6), bgcolor="white")
```

[North Carolina sample dataset](https://grass.osgeo.org/sampledata/north_carolina/nc_spm_08_grass7.zip)
(`nc_spm_08_grass7`), which includes `schools_wake` (points), `roadsmajor` (lines),
and `zipcodes_wake` (areas).
:::

::: {.callout-note title="How to run this tutorial"}
The code uses the GRASS Python API in a Jupyter notebook. If you are new to running
GRASS from Python, see the
[Get started with GRASS & Python](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/get_started/fast_track_grass_and_python.html)
tutorial. Every step also works from the GRASS GUI or command line; just use the
tool name (for example `v.buffer`) with the same parameters.
:::

# Setup and exploration

Start a GRASS session and set the
[computational region](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/g.region.html) to
the extent of the ZIP code areas, which cover the whole county. For vector-only work
the region mainly controls what the maps display.

```{python}
import sys
import subprocess

sys.path.append(
    subprocess.check_output(["grass", "--config", "python_path"], text=True).strip()
)

import grass.script as gs
import grass.jupyter as gj
from grass.tools import Tools

> session = gj.init("~/grassdata", "nc_spm_08_grass7", "PERMANENT")

Reviewer 2: Please pass the entire path as a single string, that's a better way.
In the other PR as well.

tools = Tools()

tools.g_region(vector="zipcodes_wake")
```

::: {.callout-note title="GRASS version"}
The examples use the [grass.tools API](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/python_intro.html)
(the `Tools` class), introduced in GRASS 8.5. On earlier versions you can run the
same tools with `gs.run_command("v.buffer", ...)`.
:::

Before analyzing a layer, it helps to know what it contains.
[v.info](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.info.html) reports the feature
types and counts, and its `-c` flag lists the attribute columns.

```{python}
# Feature summary (points, lines, areas ...)

> print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="t").stdout)

Reviewer 2: Use text instead of output (fix other cases in this tutorial as well please)
```suggestion
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="t").text)
```

# Attribute columns
print(tools.v_info(map="schools_wake", flags="c").stdout)
```

`schools_wake` has 167 point features. Let's look at the attribute table itself.
[v.db.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.db.select.html) can
return the table as JSON, which [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) turns into a tidy
table:

```{python}
import json
import pandas as pd

records = json.loads(
    tools.v_db_select(
        map="schools_wake",
        columns="NAMESHORT,GLEVEL,ADDRCITY,CORECAPACI",
        format="json",
    ).stdout

> )["records"]

Reviewer 2: ```
pd.DataFrame(tools.v_db_select(...)["records"]).head()
```

pd.DataFrame(records).head()
```

| NAMESHORT | GLEVEL | ADDRCITY | CORECAPACI |
|---|---|---|---|
| SWIFT CREEK | E | Raleigh | 448.0 |
| BRIARCLIFF | E | Cary | 540.0 |
| FARMINGTON WOODS | E | Cary | 523.0 |
| CARY | H | Cary | 2287.0 |
| ADAMS | E | Cary | 722.0 |

The `GLEVEL` column records each school's level (`E` for elementary, `M` for
middle, `H` for high, and so on), which we use next to select schools by
attribute. Let's first draw an overview map: the ZIP code areas, the major roads, and
the schools. In [grass.jupyter](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/libpython/grass.jupyter.html),
a `Map` object collects display layers and renders them together.

```{python}
overview = gj.Map(width=500)
overview.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
overview.d_vect(map="roadsmajor", color="90:90:90", width=1)
overview.d_vect(map="schools_wake", icon="basic/circle", size=7,
                fill_color="200:30:30", color="white")

> overview.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")

Reviewer 2: Move the scale bar to the right to not overlay the map (in all figures)

```{python}
tools.v_overlay(ainput="road_buffer", binput="zipcodes_wake",
                operator="and", output="buffer_by_zip")
```

```{python}
overlay_map = gj.Map(width=500)
overlay_map.d_vect(map="zipcodes_wake", type="area",
                   fill_color="235:235:235", color="180:180:180")
overlay_map.d_vect(map="buffer_by_zip", type="area",
                   fill_color="120:180:220", color="80:80:80", width=1)
overlay_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(3, 6), bgcolor="white")
overlay_map.show()
```

![The road buffer intersected with the ZIP code areas; polygons are split at ZIP boundaries.](images/overlay.webp)

Because each piece now carries its ZIP code, we can measure how much of each ZIP code
is within reach of a major road.
[v.to.db](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.to.db.html) computes the area
of every polygon, and a grouped SQL query with
[db.select](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/db.select.html) sums it per
ZIP code:

```{python}
tools.v_to_db(map="buffer_by_zip", option="area", columns="reach_area", units="kilometers")

# db.select also returns JSON, so the same pandas pattern works here

> reach = json.loads(

Reviewer 2: Use the same pattern as in the comment above
